α Orionis, colloquially known as Betelgeuse, has excited amateur and expert alike over
the past two years with an abnormal dimming. Some hoped to observe a supernova relatively
near Earth. Although visible evolution of the surface of α Ori may indicate changes in stellar
activity, interior stellar conditions are notoriously difficult to predict from photometric and
spectroscopic data. Any information from the core will need to diffuse out to the convective
envelope where it may have an affect on the bulk flow. Because these core properties cannot
be precisely pinned from current observation techniques, an astronomer or popular media
source can say “it could explode any day now”, but they may fail to include the ± ∼ 105
yrs error in their estimates. In order to best estimate core properties, astronomers have
combined relatively easier to measure properties, such as mass, luminosity, and radius, with
stellar core simulations in an attempt to understand the cyclic flux changes and transient
events that may occur. This is complicated by the unique conditions that α Ori resides in,
where mass ejection and a potentially violent past with a stellar companion complicates the
radiative transfer problem. Lisa Grossman of Science News, a nonprofit source dedicated
to providing accurate information on the latest science, discusses Joyce et al.’s attempt to
estimate the initial and final mass through an evolutionary simulation.
Joyce et al. begin by evaluating direct methods for estimating the age of α Ori. For
example, they note that the W velocity of α Ori deviates from that of other stars in the
region by 3σ. W velocity corresponds to the component of velocity parallel to the north
Galactic pole, and if this high velocity was caused by early ejection from the Galactic disk,
then they estimate the age to be 50 Myr by tracing the periodic motion of α Ori about
the Galactic plane (Joyce et al., 2020). Joyce et al. subscribe to the theory that predicts
disruption by a binary partner based off of the inability for 1D, rotating models to replicate
observation of the galactic dynamics (Joyce et al., 2020). The issue with this dynamical
model is it assumes an early ejection; any error in the ejection date will propagate to the
estimated age. Furthermore, estimating the lifetime of α Ori requires an accurate mass and
mass-loss estimate, which is very difficult to acquire from a single star system. Instead,
Joyce et al. attempt to match the pulsation frequency modes, mass, radius and distance
from Earth with a MESA simulation of the full evolution of α Ori.
The Mesa simulation estimates the initial mass range for α Oribetween 17 and 20 solar
masses. However, the range of accepted evolutionary tracks is partially defined by the effec-
tive temperature of α Ori, which is still in contention. TiO absorption is typically a strong
temperature dependent feature in M-giant spectra (Kubiak, 1966), so it is used to estimate
the effective temperature of α Ori. Recently this method has come under scrutiny in poten-
tially underestimating the effective temperature by around 200 K. This difference in effective
temperature means the region that α Ori falls into on the HR diagram is now different. Ap-
propriate mass estimates will need to change in order to match this new evolutionary stage.
This paper does not discuss the implications or changes in the evolutionary track for these
temperature variations and changes in the mixing-length parameter, which defines some of
the convection behavior in the MESA model. Afterwards, Joyce et al. model the seismic
behavior of α Ori afterwards using GYRE, an open source code to solve stellar pulsation
equations and model subsurface behavior. An age is determined depending on the mass and
pulsation period. Typically only the 416 and 2365 day mode was used to model the dimming
behavior, but a significant peak in the power spectrum remained after removing the effects
of the known pulsation periods, indicating that another pulsation mode with a period of 186
days may also be influencing the dimming cycle (Joyce et al., 2020). When these pulsation
modes align in time, they may cause a very dramatic decrease in the apparent magnitude.
Lisa Grossman does not cover the hydrodynamic simulation results, and thus they will not
be discussed here. The evolutionary and seismic models indicates that α Ori is still in the
helium core burning phase of the post main sequence evolution. Even with a few solar mass
uncertainties in the mass of α Ori, this still places the remaining lifetime on the order of
hundreds of thousands of years in the core helium burning phase at an age of 7 to 11 Myr
(Joyce et al., 2020).
Lisa Grossman’s discussion of the above experiments does not go much further than
claiming the timescale of the remaining lifetime of α Ori may be around 100,000 yrs. There
are theories for the overall dimming of α Ori: a large mass ejection event drove the observed
decrease in magnitude, or the convection and pulsation cycles. The first case is sensible: an
M supergiant would likely be expelling huge amounts of material due to the high opacity
molecules that can form near the photosphere. However, any extreme dust ejection would
likely be accompanied by an increase in submillimeter radiation as the dust emits approx-
imately like a black-body. Instead, a decrease in submillimeter flux was observed (Dhar-
mawardena et al., 2020). Furthermore, extreme dimming events may have also occurred in
the past, approximately around 1960 (Joyce et al., 2020). Unfortunately photometry at the
time was much less precise and observations occurred less frequently. Grossman comments
that the pulsation modes may have aligned, which stacks the dimming effect (Grossman,
2020). However, the time resolution of photometry measurements may have caused a severe
under-sampling of the 186 day mode, which leads to some uncertainty in the first overtone.
Joyce et al.’s model does predict an overtone at 185 days. Finally, how does this culminate in
the predictions of stellar age according to Science News? Grossman followed up her discussion
of the theories behind the dimming of α Ori with a description of methods on how to age stars.
She states that some stars can be placed on the Hertzsprung-Russel diagram for an approximate
age, but notes that it is not precise and only really works well in clusters (Grossman & Thompson, 2021).
She partially justifies this with the mass-lifetime relations, but does not include how a snapshot of stars placed
on the HR diagram from a cluster gives a potential age based off of the highest mass stars
that remain on the main sequence within the cluster. α Ori does not reside in a cluster
and its origin location is unknown, so this method is not helpful in determining its age.
Another empirical relation she highlights is between age and stellar spin-down, where mass
ejection or other mechanisms may drain angular momentum from the system. Grossman
claims that new data have questioned the validity of this empirical relation where some
older stars maintain high rotation rates, but fails to link or cite a source. Separately, this
is corroborated by David Soderblom in his 2010 annual review paper, where he specifies
that it is mostly useful in ageing stars younger than the Sun (Soderblom, 2010). Grossman
does not note however that many stars reside in binary systems that can complicate the
system dynamics, and even worse for the case of α Ori, a rapid rotation rate that cannot be
described by current evolutionary models (Joyce et al., 2020). This leaves only one effective
method according left by Grossman: asteroseismological modelling. She oversimplifies what
is needed to model the seismology of the star by claiming that one needs a large dataset of
brightness (Grossman & Thompson, 2021). Of course, frequent sampling over a large period
can reveal pulsation modes in a star that are incredibly important to match in a model,
but current seismological models also require mass, temperature, and convection parameter
estimates that all impact the age at which a star will exhibit the observed pulsation modes.
Mass is incredibly hard to estimate for lone systems like α Ori. Grossman cannot be faulted
for this necessarily on a general article for ageing stars, but the most poorly understood
stars are the ones that behave in ways that cannot be solved by these previous methods, and
she does contextualize the ageing methods by referencing the hype around a potential α Ori
supernova. Asteroseismological models are impressive in their ability to predict the age of stars in
an evolutionary phase (except for pre-main sequence and low mass stars) (Soderblom, 2010).
Asteroseismology can also constrain physical properties that are not possible to acquire
through other means, and are one of the most accurate ways to currently estimate age. The
data collection to produce these models however is extremely resource intensive. Frequent
observation requires a large amount of telescope time (Soderblom, 2010). Very few other
methods can age a star that does not reside in a cluster, such as isochrone matching and
lithium depletion measurements (Soderblom, 2010). α Ori does not reside in a cluster, and
exhibits irregular dynamic properties, making it a big problem for these ageing methods,
but also a great testing ground for asteroseismology. As the models improve, pulsation
modes become easier to measure, and more stars become supernova candidates, perhaps
astronomers will be able to save the date for observing one of the most violent phenomena
in the universe with modern instrumentation